.TH BYN 1 "2026-06-03" "byn 0.0.1" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
byn \- secure secrets vault with shim-based credential injection
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B byn
[\fIcommand\fR] [\fIargs...\fR]
.PP
.B byn help
[\fIcommand\fR]
.PP
.B byn
\fIcommand\fR
.B \-\-help
.PP
.B byn
\fIcommand\fR
.B help
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B byn
stores secrets locally in an encrypted vault and serves them through a
background daemon. The CLI is a thin client; the daemon owns all
business logic, encryption keys, and file state.
.PP
The vault key is a 32\-byte random key, sealed at rest by Argon2id of
the master password. Each secret value is encrypted with
XChaCha20\-Poly1305 keyed by the vault key, with the ciphertext bound
to the entry's identity via AEAD additional data.
.PP
The daemon stores its state at a fixed per\-OS system path (the data
directory) \(em there is no runtime override. To separate credentials,
use multiple vaults (\fB\-\-vault\fR), not multiple data directories.
.SH COMMANDS
.SS Setup and lifecycle
.TP
.B init
Create a fresh vault. Prompts for the master password twice. Targets
the vault named by \fB\-\-vault\fR (or \fIBYN_VAULT\fR), defaulting
to \fIdefault\fR. Vaults live under
\fI<data-dir>/vaults/<name>/\fR.
See
.BR byn-init (1).
.TP
.B unlock
Unlock the vault and start a per\-terminal session.  Prompts for the
master password.  On success, a session token is saved to
.I <data-dir>/sessions/
(keyed by the controlling terminal device number) so subsequent
commands in the same terminal window are authorised without
re\-prompting.  When stdout is not a terminal the vault is still
unlocked but no session file is written.
Run \fBbyn lock \-\-session\fR to clear the token for the current
terminal without locking the vault for other callers.
See
.BR byn-unlock (1).
.TP
.B lock \fR[\fB\-\-all\fR] \fR[\fB\-\-session\fR]
Lock the vault by zeroing the in\-memory vault key.
.B \-\-all
locks every unlocked vault.
.B \-\-session
ends only the CLI session for the current terminal (does not lock the
vault; other terminals and the portal are unaffected).
See
.BR byn-lock (1).
.TP
.B passwd \fR[\fB\-\-password\-stdin\fR]
Change the vault's master password by re\-wrapping the vault key. The
current password is required; data and lock state are preserved. With
.B \-\-password\-stdin
the current and new passwords are read as two lines from standard input.
A forgotten password is unrecoverable by design.
.TP
.B status
Print daemon and vault state.  Alias for \fBdaemon status\fR.
Accepts \fB\-\-json\fR for the raw StatusResp payload.
Vault state has two layers: \fIunlocked\fR means the daemon holds the
key in memory (trusted exec and shims run); reading values also
requires a per\-terminal session started with \fBbyn unlock\fR.
Each vault row shows \fB[session: active, expires in \&...]\fR when the
current terminal has a live session, or a dim \fB[no session in this
terminal \(em byn unlock to authorize reads]\fR when it does not.
See
.BR byn-status (1).
.SS Structure (vault / project / env)
.TP
.B vault list \fR[\fB\-\-json\fR]
List every vault present on disk under
.IR <data-dir>/vaults/ .
.TP
.B vault delete \fINAME\fR \fR[\fB\-\-password\-stdin\fR]
Securely remove a vault from disk (overwrites the wrapped key, then
removes the directory; the audit log is kept). Refuses the \fIdefault\fR
vault. See \fBDELETING WHILE LOCKED\fR below.
.TP
.B vault rename \fIOLD NEW\fR \fR[\fB\-\-password\-stdin\fR]
Rename a vault (and its audit trail) on disk. Refuses the \fIdefault\fR
vault and an existing destination. Crypto\-safe (the value encryption binds
to the vault id, not its name). The vault is left LOCKED afterwards. A
locked vault is renamed with the password, like a delete.
.TP
.B vault passwd
Alias for the top\-level \fBpasswd\fR command.
.TP
.B vault init \fR| \fBvault unlock \fR| \fBvault lock\fR
Aliases for the top\-level lifecycle commands; provided so muscle
memory works either way.
.TP
.B project list \fR[\fB\-\-json\fR]
List projects in the active vault.
.TP
.B project create \fINAME\fR
Create a project and its implicit \fIdefault\fR env.
.TP
.B project delete \fINAME\fR \fR[\fB\-\-password\-stdin\fR]
Cascade\-delete the project, its envs, entries, and entry_versions.
Refuses \fIdefault\fR. See \fBDELETING WHILE LOCKED\fR below.
.TP
.B project rename \fIOLD\fR \fINEW\fR
Rename a project. Refuses to rename the \fIdefault\fR project \(em
renaming it would break implicit scope resolution for every command
that defaults to \fIdefault\fR.
.TP
.B env list \fR[\fB\-\-json\fR]
List envs in the active project. The default env is pinned first.
.TP
.B env create \fINAME\fR
Create a non\-default env. Other envs inherit from \fIdefault\fR for
missing keys.
.TP
.B env delete \fINAME\fR \fR[\fB\-\-password\-stdin\fR]
Remove a non\-default env (cascades to its entries). Refuses
\fIdefault\fR. See \fBDELETING WHILE LOCKED\fR below.
.TP
.B env clear \fR[\fIENV\fR] \fB\-\-yes\fR \fR[\fB\-\-password\-stdin\fR]
Delete every env\-var in \fIENV\fR (defaults to the active env) while
keeping the env itself; inherited values from \fIdefault\fR are untouched.
Destructive, so \fB\-\-yes\fR is required \(em without it, prints a preview
and exits non\-zero. Password\-gated like a delete.
.TP
.B env rename \fIOLD\fR \fINEW\fR
Rename an env.
.SS Secret CRUD
.TP
.B put \fINAME\fR \fR[\fB\-\-create\-only\fR] \fR[\fB\-\-password\-stdin\fR]
Store a secret. The value is read from stdin; piping or redirection
is required so the value never appears in argv or shell history.
Overwriting an existing secret requires the master password (or an active
session); use \fB\-\-password\-stdin\fR for scripts.
See
.BR byn-put (1).
.TP
.B get \fINAME\fR \fR[\fB\-\-json\fR] \fR[\fB\-\-password\-stdin\fR]
Print a secret's decrypted value to stdout. Alias:
.BR cat .
The master password (or active session) is required on every call;
use \fB\-\-password\-stdin\fR for scripts.
See
.BR byn-get (1).
.TP
.B list \fR[\fINAME\fR|\fIGLOB\fR]
List secret names. Works while the vault is locked (the index is
plaintext metadata; only values require unlock). With a
.I NAME
or
.I GLOB
argument it is grep\-like: prints only matching names, exits 0 when at
least one matches, or prints nothing and exits 1 when none do \(em an
existence check that never reads a value. Alias:
.BR ls .
See
.BR byn-list (1).
.TP
.B delete \fINAME\fR \fR[\fB\-\-password\-stdin\fR]
Remove a secret from the vault. Alias:
.BR rm .
The master password is required (whether the vault is locked or simply
has no active session); use \fB\-\-password\-stdin\fR for scripts.
See \fBDELETING WHILE LOCKED\fR below and
.BR byn-delete (1).
.TP
.B rename \fIOLD\fR \fINEW\fR \fR[\fB\-\-password\-stdin\fR]
Move a secret to a new name. Re\-encrypts under the new name's AAD,
so unlock is required. Alias:
.BR mv .
The master password (or active session) is required;
use \fB\-\-password\-stdin\fR for scripts.
See
.BR byn-rename (1).
.TP
.B exec \fB\-\-\fR \fICOMMAND\fR \fR[\fIARGS...\fR]\ |\ \fINAME\fR \fR[\fIARGS...\fR]
Inject env\-vars into a child process. See COMMANDS \(-> "Run with
env\-vars injected" below.
.SS Run with env-vars injected
.TP
.B exec \fB\-\-\fR \fICOMMAND\fR \fR[\fIARGS...\fR]
\fBDirect form:\fR Loads env\-var entries from the active vault scope
and runs \fICOMMAND\fR with them injected alongside the existing
environment. HOW it runs depends on the mode (see \fBExecution modes\fR
below): by default the child runs privilege\-separated as
\fB_byn\-exec\fR (born in your shell's tree); with \fB\-\-no\-privsep\fR
byn \fBexecve\fR(2)s into it in\-process. Values never appear in the
parent shell or argv.
The "\fB\-\-\fR" separator is required to disambiguate exec's own
flags from the child command's flags.
.TP
.B exec \fINAME\fR \fR[\fIARGS...\fR]
\fBAlias form:\fR when a trusted \fB.byn\fR is in scope (discovered
by walking up from CWD), named entry points from its \fB[aliases]\fR
table may be invoked by name. The daemon expands the alias
server\-side: it looks up \fINAME\fR in the trust record's
\fB[aliases]\fR map, splits the value on whitespace, and appends any
extra \fIARGS\fR. The expanded argv is then subject to the same
\fB[exec] actions\fR pattern matching as a direct exec. The daemon
returns the canonical argv as \fBResolvedArgv\fR; the CLI always
uses it. Alias not found: the daemon returns an error listing the
available aliases (up to 8).
.IP
\fBStrict passthrough:\fR everything after \fINAME\fR (including
\fB\-\-flag\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR, \fB\-\-vault\fR, etc.) is forwarded
opaquely to the child \(em byn does NOT scan those tokens for its own
global flags. Global byn flags (e.g. \fB\-\-vault\fR) must be placed
\fIbefore\fR the \fBexec\fR subcommand or before \fINAME\fR (but not
after it).
.IP
\fBAlias shadowing:\fR \fBbyn exec test\fR (no \fB\-\-\fR) runs the
alias "test"; \fBbyn exec \-\- test\fR runs the literal binary "test".
Requires a trusted \fB.byn\fR in scope; using the alias form without
a \fB.byn\fR is a usage error.
.IP
\fBExecution modes:\fR By default \fBbyn exec\fR runs the child under
privilege separation as the \fB_byn\-exec\fR service user, born in your
shell's process tree \(em its injected env is hidden from your own
\fBps \-E\fR, and a trusted \fB.byn\fR with a matching \fB[exec]\fR
action runs credential\-free (no password, even with the vault locked).
This is the mode for agents, CI, and unattended runs.
.IP
\fB\-\-no\-privsep\fR runs the child IN\-PROCESS as YOU (\fBexecve\fR(2)),
so its injected env is visible to your own \fBps \-E\fR; therefore this
mode REQUIRES the master password on EVERY run (no blind trusted\-file
run). Use it for interactive step\-debugging: a launch\-mode debugger
(e.g. VS Code "launch") can attach because the process shares your UID.
A debugger cannot attach across UIDs \(em the same kernel rule that
hides the env from your \fBps \-E\fR \(em so it cannot attach to a
privsep child directly.
.IP
\fB\-\-inspect\fR[=\fIPORT\fR] / \fB\-\-inspect\fR \fIPORT\fR (and
\fB\-\-inspect\-brk\fR) keeps privsep AND enables the Node inspector so
you can debug while secrets stay hidden: byn sets \fBNODE_OPTIONS\fR and
your debugger ATTACHES over loopback TCP (UID\-agnostic). With no
\fIPORT\fR byn picks the next FREE port (printed) so concurrent debug
sessions don't collide. An explicit \fIPORT\fR (\fB9230\fR or
\fB127.0.0.1:9230\fR, spaced or \fB=\fR) is used only if FREE \(em
otherwise byn fails with a clear message instead of a buried
EADDRINUSE. \fB\-\-inspect=0\fR lets each node process self\-allocate a
free port (best for multi\-process runners like \fBtsx watch\fR). Point
your editor at an "attach" target.
.IP
\fBServer\-side authorization (one round\-trip):\fR the daemon reads,
trust\-verifies, and parses the \fB.byn\fR itself and returns ONLY the
entries listed in \fB[exec] env\fR \(em a compromised client cannot
widen the allowlist. Denial messages (untrusted / changed / tampered
/ stale) come from the daemon with a \fBbyn trust\fR recovery hint.
Every exec attempt \(em allowed or denied, including locked\-vault
denials \(em is written to the vault's audit log with the full
command line. Alias execs are logged as "alias NAME \(-> resolved argv"
(capped at 200 chars).
.IP
\fBVault locked:\fR exec always fails with "vault is locked". Unlike
the delete family, exec cannot proceed with a password alone; the
vault must be unlocked first (\fBbyn unlock\fR).
.IP
Only exec verifies the \fB.byn\fR is trusted (machine + vault\-key MAC)
before injecting; an untrusted, changed, or tampered \fB.byn\fR aborts
\(em other commands apply a \fB.byn\fR scope without a trust check.
A discovered \fB.byn\fR controls two separate allowlists:
.IP
\fB[exec] env\fR (env\-vars): a name list injects only those, \fB"*"\fR
injects all (with a warning), and an empty or absent list injects
nothing; with no \fB.byn\fR (ad\-hoc) the whole scope is injected.
\fB[exec] env\fR is ENV\-VARS ONLY \(em it does not restrict which
command runs.
.IP
\fB[exec] actions\fR (commands): controls which commands may run
without per\-call authorization. Three states:
(1) absent or empty \(em SECURE DEFAULT: no command runs free; every
exec requires authorization;
(2) \fB"*"\fR or \fB["*"]\fR \(em wildcard: all commands run free (loud warning);
(3) explicit list with optional typed placeholders \(em matching
commands run free; others require authorization. Example:
\fB"pytest {{args}}"\fR matches "pytest", "pytest \-v", and any
"pytest ..." invocation; \fB"aws s3 cp {{path}} {{path}}"\fR matches
that exact two-argument pattern. Supported placeholders:
\fB{{uuid}}\fR, \fB{{int}}\fR, \fB{{alnum}}\fR, \fB{{str}}\fR, \fB{{path}}\fR,
\fB{{url}}\fR, \fB{{re:...}}\fR, \fB{{args}}\fR (tail wildcard; must be last).
Patterns that fail to parse are non\-matching (never widening).
.IP
The \fB[auth] exec\fR policy can override: \fB"always"\fR forces fresh
auth for every exec (even matched/wildcard); \fB"none"\fR frees all
commands (wildcard\-equivalent; the warning is shown at \fBbyn trust\fR time).
Actions policy is read from the MAC\-bound trust record (not the live file)
so editing the \fB.byn\fR post\-trust cannot change the effective policy.
Actions enforcement is INDEPENDENT of session state.
The \fB[auth] exec\fR key applies only to trusted\-\fB.byn\fR exec (Path
present); ad\-hoc exec (no \fB.byn\fR) is governed solely by
the NU\-3 session gate \(em \fB.byn\fR policy is never consulted
for ad\-hoc exec.
.IP
The \fB.byn\fR is strict TOML: any key outside \fB[scope]\fR / \fB[exec]\fR
/ \fB[auth]\fR / \fB[aliases]\fR is a hard parse error.
.IP
Ad\-hoc exec (no \fB.byn\fR) is always gated by the NU\-3 session gate:
the CLI prompts once for the master password and retries when no session
is present. Trusted\-\fB.byn\fR exec with an unmatched command is also
gated (same retry flow). Trusted\-\fB.byn\fR exec with a pinned command
runs free \(em the session gate and the actions list are independent.
.IP
\fBPrivilege separation:\fR with \fB[security] privsep\fR enabled in
\fI~/.byn/config\fR, a trusted\-\fB.byn\fR pinned exec runs its child as
the \fB_byn\-exec\fR service user (set up via \fBbyn setup\fR), so other
same\-UID processes cannot read the injected secrets from the child's
environment. \fB\-\-no\-privsep\fR forces the in\-process path. Ad\-hoc
exec (no \fB.byn\fR) always runs in\-process. Privsep is opt\-in and off
by default; if it is enabled but \fBbyn setup\fR has not provisioned the
service users, exec fails with an actionable error rather than silently
running in\-process.
See
.BR byn-exec (1).
.SS Bulk I/O
.TP
.B import \fR[\fB\-\-format\fR \fIenv\fR|\fIyaml\fR|\fIjson\fR] \fR[\fB\-\-dry\-run\fR] \fR[\fB\-\-skip\-existing\fR | \fB\-\-replace\fR \fR[\fB\-\-yes\fR]] \fR[\fIPATH\fR | \fB\-\fR]
Bulk\-load key/value entries into the active scope from a
\fB.env\fR, YAML, or JSON file (or stdin). Format is inferred from
the file extension first, then sniffed (a leading "{" implies JSON);
\fB\-\-format\fR forces it. Nested objects are rejected with a clear
error pointing at the offending key. \fB\-\-dry\-run\fR prints what
would be written (key + byte length, never the value) \- and when
combined with \fB\-\-replace\fR, also the entries that would be
deleted.
.IP
Three modes (mutually exclusive):
\fBmerge\fR (default) adds new keys, overwrites matching ones, and
leaves other keys in the scope untouched;
\fB\-\-skip\-existing\fR refuses to overwrite (add\-only);
\fB\-\-replace\fR wipes every existing key in the scope first, then
imports. \fB\-\-replace\fR prompts in interactive terminals;
\fB\-\-yes\fR skips the prompt and is required in non\-TTY / agent
mode.
.IP
Dotenv parser supports: \fBexport\fR PREFIX, double\-quoted values
with \\n / \\t / \\" / \\\\ escapes, single\-quoted literals,
inline \fB# comment\fR stripping, and blank/comment lines. YAML/JSON
scalars (string, bool, number, null) are coerced to strings; anything
deeper than a flat map is rejected.
.TP
.B export \fR[\fB\-\-format\fR \fIenv\fR|\fIyaml\fR|\fIjson\fR] \fR[\fB\-\-output\fR \fIPATH\fR] \fR[\fB\-\-password\-stdin\fR]
Dump every entry in the active scope as a flat key/value document.
Default format is \fBenv\fR. \fB\-\-output\fR writes to disk with
mode 0600; otherwise output goes to stdout. Keys are sorted
alphabetically. Dotenv values containing whitespace, "#", "=", or "
are wrapped in double quotes with standard escapes.
With an active session, each entry is authorized by the session token —
zero password prompts. Without a session, \fB\-\-password\-stdin\fR is the
non\-interactive path (reads the password once from stdin); the CLI
prompts once interactively on the first \fBauth_required\fR and reuses it
for the rest. Running \fBbyn unlock\fR first avoids the per\-entry
Argon2id overhead on large exports.
.IP
.B Caveat:
this materialises plaintext. Treat the destination as you would a
\fB.env\fR file \- never commit, never share.
.SS Diagnostics and audit
.TP
.B doctor \fR[\fB\-\-json\fR]
Run a battery of self\-checks against the daemon and every vault on
disk: daemon liveness, vault enumeration, schema + fingerprint
match, audit\-chain HMAC integrity. Each check returns
\fBok\fR / \fBwarn\fR / \fBfail\fR. Exits non\-zero if any
\fBfail\fR.
.TP
.B audit view \fR[\fB\-\-lines\fR \fIN\fR] \fR[\fB\-\-json\fR]
Snapshot the most recent \fIN\fR events from the active vault's audit
log (default 50; \fB\-\-lines 0\fR returns all) and exit. Allowed while
locked \- log metadata is not secret. Each row ends with the caller
for forensics: surface (\fBsocket\fR = CLI/TUI, \fBportal\fR =
browser), process name, pid/uid, and the parent process (who invoked
it) \- e.g. \fIsocket:byn(pid 9123, uid 501)\(<-node\fR. A reveal in
the browser or TUI routes through \fBget\fR and is logged as such.
.TP
.B audit tail \fR[\fB\-n\fR \fIN\fR] \fR[\fB\-f\fR] \fR[\fB\-\-json\fR]
Like \fBtail\fR(1): print the last \fIN\fR events (default 10) and
exit. With \fB\-f\fR, follow \- stream new events in realtime until
Ctrl\-C (NDJSON when combined with \fB\-\-json\fR).
.TP
.B audit verify \fR[\fB\-\-json\fR]
Re\-walk the active vault's audit log and recompute the HMAC chain
end\-to\-end. Exits 0 with "chain intact" on success; exits 3 with
"chain BROKEN at event #N" if any link fails verification.
.SS Trust (\fB.byn\fR TOFU)
.TP
.B trust \fR[\fIPATH\fR...] \fR[\fB\-\-paths\fR \fI"a,b,c"\fR] \fR[\fB\-\-recursive\fR] \fR[\fB\-\-password\-stdin\fR]
Approve one or more \fB.byn\fR files (default:
.IR ./.byn ;
a directory resolves to \fI<dir>/.byn\fR, and \fB\-\-recursive\fR walks
directories for every \fB.byn\fR). Files are grouped by their target vault,
so each vault's password is asked once.
\fBAlways prompts for the master password\fR \(em even when the vault is
unlocked \(em because approving a \fB.byn\fR is a proof\-of\-presence action.
The daemon (which owns
.IR ~/.byn/trusted_byn.json )
verifies the password against the vault the \fB.byn\fR targets, then records
the canonical path plus SHA\-256 of the contents plus the full file body (the
\fIsnapshot\fR used by \fBtrust diff\fR). If the file already exists
in the store with a different hash (changed since trusted), \fBtrust\fR warns
before re\-approving. Discovery never auto\-trusts: a new or changed \fB.byn\fR
is refused until you run this command. Use \fB\-\-password\-stdin\fR to read
the password from stdin in scripts. \fB.byn files exceeding 64KB are
refused.\fR
.IP
\fB[auth] table \(em per-scope authorization policy.\fR
A \fB.byn\fR may declare an
.B [auth]
table with keys
.BR get ,
.BR update " (overwrite-put, rename),"
.BR delete " (delete, env.clear, env.delete, project.delete, vault.delete),"
and
.BR exec .
Values:
.B "always"
\(em fresh auth unconditionally, even with an active session (tightens);
.B "none"
\(em gate skipped entirely for the matched scope (relaxes).
Absent \(em session gate decides (default NU\-3 semantics).
The policy is MAC\-bound at grant time (read from the trust record, not the
live file). A more\-specific scope record (vault+project+env beats vault+project
beats vault\-only) wins per key; same\-specificity ties go to the strictest
value (\fBalways\fR beats \fBnone\fR). Lookup requires the vault to be
unlocked (VKMAC key unavailable while locked \(em falls through to session
gate semantics).
Vault\-level ops (\fBvault.delete\fR, \fBvault.rename\fR) pass
\fBScope{}\fR (no project/env) to the policy gate; a vault\-only record
(no project/env in \fB[scope]\fR) matches and therefore gates those ops.
Cross\-reference: \fB[auth] exec\fR and
\fB[exec] actions\fR are independent \(em see \fBbyn help exec\fR.
.TP
.B trust diff \fIPATH\fR
Compare the current on-disk \fB.byn\fR at \fIPATH\fR against the snapshot
recorded when trust was granted, and print a unified diff to stdout.
Requires no password \(em manifests are not secrets.
.IP
Exits \fB0\fR when the file is identical (content and modification time
unchanged). Exits \fB1\fR when the content differs \fIor\fR the modification
time changed without a content change (a \fBtouch\fR or an edit-then-revert
\(em re\-trust either way). Exits \fB2\fR when the daemon is not running,
\fB3\fR when the path is not trusted or the record predates snapshots
(re\-trust with \fBbyn trust\fR to enable diff).
.IP
Typical changed\(emreview\(emre\-trust flow:
.EX
  $ byn exec \-\- make build   # fails: .byn has CHANGED
  $ byn trust diff ./.byn    # review the diff
  $ byn trust ./.byn         # re\-approve (prompts for password)
  $ byn exec \-\- make build   # succeeds
.EE
.TP
.B trust list \fR[\fB\-\-json\fR]
Print every trusted path with the first 12 hex chars of its hash.
.TP
.B untrust \fR[\fIPATH\fR...] \fR[\fB\-\-paths\fR \fI"a,b,c"\fR] \fR[\fB\-\-recursive\fR]
Revoke trust for one or more paths (default:
.IR ./.byn ),
using the same path forms as \fBtrust\fR (directories, \fB\-\-paths\fR,
\fB\-\-recursive\fR). Needs no password \(em revoking is fail-safe \(em and is
idempotent.
.SS Visual editor
.TP
.B edit, view, byn \fR(no args)
Open the responsive bubbletea TUI. Left rail navigates
vault/project/env; main pane shows ENV-VARS + FILES + RECENT AUDIT;
right detail pane on Large terminals (>= 120 cols).
.IP
Honors
.B \-\-vault ,
.B \-\-project ,
.B \-\-env
on launch \- bootstrap prompts for the targeted vault's password
and lands the rail cursor on the most\-specific matching node.
.IP
\fBvi\-style draft semantics\fR: typing modifies a local buffer only;
the daemon is not contacted. Use
.B :w
to commit,
.B :q
to leave edit context (refuses dirty),
.B :q!
to discard, or
.B :wq
to commit and leave.
.B ESC
preserves the draft. Dirty drafts are surfaced as a red
\fB[DRAFT: NAME]\fR chip in the status line plus a \fB[*]\fR prefix
on the affected entry row.
.IP
\fBvim commands\fR: \fBu\fR undoes,
.B Ctrl\-R
redoes (per\-keystroke history, capped at 200 per draft). \fBy\fR
yanks the selected entry's value to the system clipboard (fires a
daemon get + audit event). \fBp\fR pastes the clipboard into the
draft at cursor.
.B Ctrl\-V
pastes inline while in INSERT mode.
.IP
\fBInheritance badges\fR in non\-default envs:
.B \(da
(inherited from default),
.B \(la
(overrides default), and
.B \(de
(new in this env).
.IP
Alias:
.BR view .
See
.BR byn-edit (1)
and
.IR docs/tui-design.md
for the full design.
.SS Deleting while locked
The deletes \(em
.BR delete / rm ,
.BR "project delete" ,
.BR "env delete" ,
and
.BR "vault delete"
\(em touch only names, never values, so they never need the vault key. A
locked vault therefore accepts them when you supply the master password:
the daemon verifies it and proceeds WITHOUT unlocking the vault, so its
other values are never exposed to a watching process. The same flow
applies when the vault is unlocked but no active session is present:
a fresh password authorizes the operation without changing the
vault's lock state. Interactively, the CLI prompts for the password when
it finds the vault locked or authorization required; for scripts, pass
.B \-\-password\-stdin
to read it from standard input (the flag must precede the name). A wrong
password is rejected and rate\-limited like
.BR unlock .
By contrast, ADDING or editing a value needs the key to encrypt and so
cannot be done while locked \(em unlock first. \fBexec\fR also cannot
proceed with a password alone \(em it always requires an unlocked vault.
.SS Web portal
.TP
.B web, ui
Open the browser admin portal hosted by the daemon at
.I http://localhost:2967
(configurable via \fB[ui] port\fR in \fI~/.byn/config\fR). A web UI over
the same vault as the CLI and TUI. There is no portal login: like
\fBbyn ls\fR, the scope tree and entry names are visible, but reading or
editing VALUES requires the target vault to be unlocked \(em a per\-vault
lock/unlock toggle in the UI. Browse vault/project/env, create/delete
scopes and vaults, view/edit env\-var entries, and reveal values (each
reveal is audited). Write/delete/reveal actions trigger an in\-page
"Authorize" step\-up when no active session is present: passkey (Touch ID)
first, then password fallback. On success, the daemon issues a single\-use
presence token consumed by the retry; the token is never stored or reused. Binds loopback only; CSRF is defended by an
Origin check. Disable with \fB[ui] enabled = false\fR. See
\fBbyn-web\fR(1).
.SS System setup (privsep)
.TP
.B setup \fR[\fB\-\-uninstall \fR[\fB\-\-purge\fR]]
Provision the full privilege\-separation install in one idempotent,
root\-required step. With no flags,
.B byn setup
(1) creates the
.I _byn
and
.I _byn\-exec
service accounts and installs the prebuilt privileged spawn helper
.RI ( byn\-exec\-helper )
plus its root\-owned UID/GID config; (2) installs and loads the system service
that runs the daemon as the
.I _byn
service user (a systemd system unit on Linux, a LaunchDaemon on macOS) \(em NOT
the human owner; (3) relocates any legacy per\-user
.I ~/.byn
vault into the fixed per\-OS system data path, chowned to
.I _byn
(trust + passkeys preserved \(em same machine), skipping this on a fresh
install; (4) records the OWNER UID \(em the human who ran sudo, read from
.IR SUDO_UID
\(em as the single UID the daemon allowlists on its peer\-credential\-gated
socket; and (5) verifies the post\-conditions.
.IP
Must be run as root, via sudo so
.I SUDO_UID
is set:
.BR "sudo byn setup" .
Running as real root (not via sudo) fails rather than recording root as the
owner. Idempotent \(em re\-running on an already\-provisioned host reinstalls
the helper + service, re\-records the owner, and exits 0 (safe on every install
and upgrade). The prebuilt
.I byn\-exec\-helper
must sit beside the byn binary.
.IP
On Linux, accounts are created via
.BR systemd\-sysusers (8).
On macOS,
.BR sysadminctl (8)
is used. Other platforms are unsupported.
Setup provisions privsep; it does not enable it.
Privilege separation is opt\-in: set
.B [security] privsep = true
in
.I ~/.byn/config
and restart the daemon to engage it.
With privsep enabled and provisioned, the daemon spawns trusted\-.byn pinned
exec children as
.IR _byn\-exec .
Enable privsep without having run setup and the daemon warns; trusted\-.byn
exec then fails closed (it never silently runs owner\-UID).
.IP
.B \-\-uninstall
reverses a previous setup: it uninstalls the system service, removes the spawn
helper + config, and removes the owner record. It LEAVES the vault (the system
data dir) intact by default. Add
.B \-\-purge
to ALSO delete the system data dir and every secret in it \(em a destructive,
irreversible action gated behind a typed
.B yes
confirmation. The vault is NEVER removed without
.BR \-\-purge .
.TP
.B migrate \fR[\fB\-\-from \fIpath\fR] \fR[\fB\-\-force\fR]
Adopt a byn vault tree into the fixed per\-OS system data path with the
correct structure and ownership (the
.I _byn
service account, mode 0700).
The source is verified WITHOUT its password \(em every
.I vault.db
must open as a well\-formed, correctly\-versioned vault whose
.I wrapped.key/meta.json
fingerprint matches and whose audit chain is intact \(em before anything is
adopted; a malformed, truncated, or tampered source is rejected and the
destination is left untouched. The adopt is atomic and re\-runnable; it never
half\-migrates.
.IP
Must be run as root (it writes the
.I _byn\-owned
system path and chowns the tree). The
.I _byn
account must already exist; if it does not, run
.B byn setup
first \(em migrate adopts with the correct ownership, it does not create users.
.IP
With no
.BR \-\-from ,
.B migrate
RELOCATES the legacy
.I ~/.byn
into the system path (the upgrade path). Same machine: the trust store and
passkey enrollments are KEPT, and the old
.I ~/.byn
is removed only AFTER the destination is fully adopted.
.IP
With
.BI \-\-from " path"
,
.B migrate
IMPORTS an external vault (a backup, a mounted disk, a synced dir): it COPIES
the tree in and NEVER deletes the source. An import brings vault DATA only \(em
the trust store and passkey enrollments are DROPPED (trust is never silently
carried across a machine boundary), so afterwards you MUST re\-trust your
.I .byn
files with
.B byn trust
and re\-enroll passkeys on this machine. A non\-empty destination is refused
unless
.B \-\-force
is given.
See
.BR byn-setup (1),
.BR byn-trust (1).
.SS macOS Full Disk Access (TCC)
On macOS the daemon runs as the
.B _byn
service user under launchd, and macOS privacy protection (TCC) blocks it from
reading
.I .byn
files in protected folders \(em
.IR ~/Documents ", " ~/Desktop ", " ~/Downloads ,
and iCloud Drive \(em even when POSIX permissions and ACLs allow it. The symptom
is
.B operation not permitted
(EPERM) when trusting or running, distinct from
.B permission denied
(EACCES). TCC overrides file ACLs, so
.BR chmod / setfacl
cannot fix it. Two resolutions:
.TP
.B Keep projects outside the protected folders (recommended)
Put byn\-managed projects under e.g.
.IR ~/code ", " ~/dev ", or " /opt
\(em not
.IR ~/Documents , ~/Desktop , ~/Downloads ,
or iCloud Drive. No Full Disk Access and no code signing required. A symlink does
not help; TCC checks the real path.
.TP
.B Grant the daemon Full Disk Access
Open System Settings \(-> Privacy & Security \(-> Full Disk Access, add the byn
binary
.RI ( /usr/local/bin/byn ),
enable it, then restart the daemon:
.RS
.B sudo launchctl kickstart \-k system/com.sandeepbaynes.byn
.RE
The binary ships ad\-hoc signed, so the grant is tied to that build and must be
re\-granted after each reinstall. To make it persist, sign the binary with a
stable identity \(em a
.B free
Apple ID certificate suffices (no paid program):
.RS
.B make install CODESIGN_IDENTITY="Apple Development: you@example.com (TEAMID)"
.RE
The full step\-by\-step, including the
.B codesign
commands and the paid Developer ID path for distributing to other Macs, is in
.I docs/troubleshooting.md
(\(lqmacOS Full Disk Access (TCC)\(rq).
.SS Daemon control
.TP
.B start \fR[\fB\-\-foreground\fR] \fR[\fB\-\-allow\-root\fR]
Start the daemon (detached by default). The daemon refuses to run as root
(uid 0) \(em a root daemon defeats the \fB_byn\fR privilege separation it
installs; pass \fB\-\-allow\-root\fR to override (NOT recommended). Alias:
\fBbyn daemon start\fR.
.TP
.B stop
SIGTERM the daemon via its pidfile. Alias: \fBbyn daemon stop\fR.
.TP
.B restart \fR[\fB\-\-foreground\fR] \fR[\fB\-\-allow\-root\fR]
Stop the running daemon (if any) and start a fresh one \- one command
instead of stop + start. Picks up a new binary and config. Forwards
\fB\-\-foreground\fR / \fB\-\-allow\-root\fR to start. Alias:
\fBbyn daemon restart\fR.
.TP
.B reload
Signal the running daemon (SIGHUP) to re-read
.I ~/.byn/config
and apply runtime-changeable settings \(em \fBidle_timeout\fR,
\fB[security] session_ttl\fR, \fB[security] session_idle\fR, and the web
portal (enable/disable/port) \(em without a restart. Open vaults stay unlocked.
Alias: \fBbyn daemon reload\fR.
.TP
.B daemon status
Print daemon state, vault lock state, and uptime.
Each unlocked vault shows the caller's per\-terminal session state:
\fB[session: active]\fR when a session exists, or a dim
\fB[no session in this terminal]\fR note otherwise.
\(lqUnlocked\(rq means the daemon holds the key; value reads
still require a session or the master password.
.TP
.B daemon install
Register the daemon as a user auto-start service (launchd LaunchAgent on
macOS, a systemd \fB\-\-user\fR unit on Linux) so it starts on login.
Writes the service file and loads it best-effort.
No root.
This is the auto-start path for the default (non-privsep) install;
privilege-separated installs use
.B byn setup
instead (which installs a SYSTEM service running the daemon as
.IR _byn ).
.TP
.B daemon uninstall
Disable and remove the auto-start service.
See
.BR byn-daemon (1).
.SS Diagnostics
.TP
.B version
Print the binary version string.
.TP
.B help \fR[\fICOMMAND\fR]
Print top\-level help, or detailed help for a specific command.
.SH OPTIONS
.SS Global
These flags work \fBbefore or after\fR the subcommand. Conflicting
duplicates are a hard error.
.TP
.B \-\-vault \fINAME\fR
Target vault. Env\-var fallback:
.BR BYN_VAULT .
Defaults to \fIdefault\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-project \fINAME\fR
Target project. Env\-var fallback:
.BR BYN_PROJECT .
Defaults to \fIdefault\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-env \fINAME\fR
Target env. Env\-var fallback:
.BR BYN_ENV .
Defaults to \fIdefault\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-json
Agent mode. Emits machine\-readable output where applicable AND
disables all interactive prompts; an untrusted
.B .byn
file is a hard error instead of a y/N prompt.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-discovery
Skip the
.B .byn
parent\-directory walk for this call. Env\-var alternative:
.BR BYN_NO_DISCOVERY=1 .
.TP
.BR \-\-help ", " \-h
Print command\-specific help and exit.
.SS Subcommand
.TP
.B \-\-password\-stdin
Used by \fBinit\fR, \fBunlock\fR, \fBget\fR, \fBput\fR (overwrite),
\fBrename\fR, \fBdelete\fR, \fBexport\fR, \fBvault delete\fR, \fBvault rename\fR,
\fBproject delete\fR, \fBproject rename\fR, \fBenv delete\fR,
\fBenv clear\fR, \fBenv rename\fR. Read the password from stdin
instead of prompting at the terminal. Useful for automation; the
caller is responsible for not leaking the password via shell
history. Required for \fBget\fR / \fBput\fR / \fBrename\fR in non\-interactive
contexts (no TTY) when no active session is present.
.IP
\fBput --password-stdin contract:\fR the first line of stdin is the
master password; the remainder (after the first newline) is the secret
value. The first line is always consumed when \fB\-\-password\-stdin\fR
is set, even if the daemon never asks for authorization:
.IP
.EX
$ { echo "$BYN_PW"; printf 'new-val'; } | byn put key \-\-password\-stdin
.EE
.TP
.B \-\-create\-only
Used by \fBput\fR. Refuse to overwrite an existing secret with that
name.
.TP
.B \-\-foreground
Used by \fBdaemon start\fR. Run in the foreground instead of
detaching. Useful for development and supervised\-service setups.
.TP
.B \-\-allow\-root
Used by \fBdaemon start\fR / \fBdaemon restart\fR. Override the refusal to
run the daemon as root (uid 0). A root daemon defeats the \fB_byn\fR
privilege separation it installs (least privilege), so the daemon refuses to
start as root by default. This override is posture hygiene only \(em it is NOT
a defense against an attacker who already has root \(em and using it logs a
prominent warning. NOT recommended.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-privsep
Used by \fBexec\fR. Force the legacy in\-process exec path even when
\fB[security] privsep\fR is enabled \(em the child is run by the calling
user via \fBexecve\fR(2) instead of the daemon spawning it under the
\fB_byn\-exec\fR service user. Place it before the "\fB\-\-\fR" separator
(direct form) or before the alias \fINAME\fR (alias form); tokens after
that boundary are the child's argv.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
The daemon data directory is a fixed per\-OS system path with no
environment override. The daemon places its socket, pidfile, logs,
auth\-state, and the
.B vaults/
subtree there. Use multiple vaults (\fB\-\-vault\fR), not multiple data
directories, to separate credentials.
.TP
.B NO_COLOR
If set to any non\-empty value, disables ANSI color codes in CLI
output. See
.UR https://no-color.org
no\-color.org
.UE .
.TP
.B FORCE_COLOR
If set to any non\-empty value, forces ANSI color codes even when
stderr is not a terminal.
.TP
.B BYN_VAULT, BYN_PROJECT, BYN_ENV
Default scope when the corresponding
.BR \-\-vault ,
.BR \-\-project ,
or
.B \-\-env
flag is not given. CLI flag beats env var beats discovered
.B .byn
beats daemon default.
.TP
.B BYN_NO_DISCOVERY
If set to \fB1\fR, skips the
.B .byn
parent\-directory walk entirely.
.TP
.B BYN_HINTS
If set to \fB0\fR, \fBfalse\fR, \fBoff\fR, or \fBno\fR, suppresses
the short post\-mutation stderr echoes (e.g. "Stored \fIK\fR in
\fIvault/project/env\fR"). Auto\-suppressed when stderr is not a
TTY.
.TP
.B PAGER
Pager binary for
.BR "byn help" .
Default
.B less \-RFX
when available, falling back to
.BR more .
Set
.B PAGER=cat
or
.B BYN_NO_PAGER=1
to disable.
.TP
.B BYN_NO_PAGER
If set to \fB1\fR, disables paging on
.B byn help
output even if
.B $PAGER
is set.
.SH FILES
Under the data root (default
.IR ~/.byn/ ):
.TP
.I config
Optional TOML configuration (no file extension). Recognised keys:
\fB[ui] port\fR (browser admin portal port, default 2967),
\fB[ui] enabled\fR,
\fB[ui] reveal_hide_after\fR (Go duration; default \fB"15s"\fR),
\fB[daemon] idle_timeout\fR (Go duration string; default 15m, set
\fB"0s"\fR to disable vault auto\-relock),
\fB[security] session_ttl\fR (Go duration; default \fB"12h"\fR \(em
absolute lifetime of a minted session; \fB"0s"\fR disables the limit),
\fB[security] session_idle\fR (Go duration; default \fB"0s"\fR \(em
sliding idle window; \fB"0s"\fR inherits \fIidle_timeout\fR), and
\fB[security] privsep\fR (boolean; default OFF when the key is absent \(em
opt the daemon into running trusted\-\fB.byn\fR exec children under the
\fB_byn\-exec\fR service user; requires \fBbyn setup\fR).
Unknown keys (including the removed \fBper_action_auth\fR) are rejected with an error. A missing file uses the
defaults. Loaded at
.BR "byn start" ;
\fB[security] session_ttl\fR, \fB[security] session_idle\fR, and
\fB[daemon] idle_timeout\fR
hot\-apply via \fBbyn daemon reload\fR without a restart.
.TP
.I daemon.sock
Unix domain socket, mode 0600. The daemon enforces same\-UID access
via the peer credential socket option.
.TP
.I daemon.pid
Pidfile (single\-instance guard). Stale pidfiles are detected via
signal\-0 probe and replaced.
.TP
.I daemon.log
Combined stdout/stderr of a detached daemon (omitted when started
with \fB\-\-foreground\fR).
.TP
.I auth-state.json
Failed\-unlock backoff state. Persisted across daemon restarts so
restarting the daemon doesn't reset the rate limiter.
.TP
.I trusted_byn.json
TOFU records for
.B .byn
files \- a JSON map of canonical paths to SHA\-256 hashes of file
contents. Mode 0600.
.TP
.I audit/<vault>/YYYY-MM.log
Per\-vault append\-only audit log, rolled monthly. NDJSON; one event
per line; each event carries an
.B hmac_chain
field that depends on the previous event's chain (tamper\-evident).
Allowed to be read while the vault is locked.
.PP
Under
.IR vaults/<name>/ :
.TP
.I vault.db
SQLite database. Schema v2: projects, envs, entries, file_meta,
entry_versions, meta.
.TP
.I vault.db-wal, vault.db-shm
SQLite WAL files.
.TP
.I wrapped.key
Argon2id\-wrapped vault key, mode 0600.
.TP
.I meta.json
Vault sidecar: vault_id (UUID v4), wrapped\-key SHA\-256 fingerprint,
creation timestamp. Validated before the password prompt at unlock
so a corrupted or swapped wrapped.key is detected with a clear
diagnostic.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Generic error: bad usage, runtime failure, missing required input.
.TP
.B 2
Daemon unreachable. The CLI prints a recovery hint with the command
to run.
.TP
.B 3
Daemon returned a typed error: wrong password, secret not found,
vault locked, etc.
.SH EXAMPLES
Create and unlock a fresh vault interactively:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
$ byn init
$ byn unlock
.fi
.RE
.PP
Store and retrieve a credential:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
$ echo \-n "AKIA..." | byn put aws-access-key
$ byn get aws-access-key
AKIA...
.fi
.RE
.PP
Pipe a secret into another tool without ever materializing it on
disk:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
$ aws --profile "$(byn get aws-profile)" s3 ls
.fi
.RE
.PP
Use the vault from a script (no interactive prompts):
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
$ echo "$MASTER_PW" | byn init --password-stdin
$ echo "$MASTER_PW" | byn unlock --password-stdin
.fi
.RE
.PP
Browse the vault visually:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
$ byn edit
.fi
.RE
.PP
Switch scope per call:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
$ byn \-\-project myapp \-\-env staging list
$ echo s3cr3t | byn \-\-project myapp put DB_PASSWORD
$ BYN_PROJECT=myapp byn list   # env\-var fallback
.fi
.RE
.PP
Vault / project / env management:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
$ byn project create myapp
$ byn \-\-project myapp env create staging
$ byn vault list \-\-json | jq '.[].name'
.fi
.RE
.PP
Import a .env / YAML / JSON file:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
$ byn import .env.local                 # by extension
$ cat config.json | byn import \-\-format json
$ byn import secrets.yaml \-\-dry\-run   # preview
$ byn import .env \-\-skip\-existing     # add\-only
.fi
.RE
.PP
Export back out:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
$ byn export                            # dotenv to stdout
$ byn export \-\-format json > snapshot.json
$ byn export \-\-output /tmp/dump.env    # 0600 file
.fi
.RE
.PP
Verify everything is healthy and check the audit chain:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
$ byn doctor
$ byn audit tail \-\-lines 20
$ byn audit verify
.fi
.RE
.PP
Auto\-pick scope from a project directory via
.BR .byn :
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
$ cat > .byn <<'EOF'
[scope]
project = "myapp"
env = "dev"

[exec]
env = ["DATABASE_URL", "API_KEY"]   # byn exec injects only these
EOF
$ byn trust ./.byn          # first time only
$ byn list                  # uses myapp/dev automatically
$ byn exec -- ./run.sh      # runs ./run.sh with those two injected
.fi
.RE
.PP
Agent\-safe invocation (hard\-fail on untrusted
.BR .byn ,
JSON output for parsing):
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
$ byn \-\-json list
$ byn \-\-json status
$ byn \-\-no\-discovery list  # bypass .byn entirely
.fi
.RE
.SH SECURITY MODEL
.IP \(bu 2
The daemon is per\-user. Other UIDs are rejected at the socket via
the OS peer\-credential check.
.IP \(bu 2
Secret values are encrypted at rest with XChaCha20\-Poly1305.
AAD\-binding to the entry's vault_id, kind, and name means swapping
ciphertexts across rows within the same vault fails decryption.
.IP \(bu 2
The vault key is wrapped with Argon2id of the master password.
Failed unlock attempts trigger exponential backoff persisted to
disk.
.IP \(bu 2
\fBdoes not\fR defend against a malicious user with the same UID as
the daemon. Memory protection (mlock for master password / Argon2
workspace via
.IR internal/secmem )
is staged but not yet wired into the unlock path \- see deferred
items in
.IR docs/security.md .
.SS Known limitations
byn is a development\-time secrets tool, not a production secrets manager.
With privilege separation enabled it runs your commands under a dedicated
service user and audits every access, but the following limits apply:
.IP \(bu 2
\fBConcurrent commands share one service user.\fR Two byn\-run commands
running at once both execute as the single
.I _byn\-exec
account, so they are not isolated from each other \(em one can read the
other's injected secrets. Don't run mutually\-distrusting commands in
parallel under byn.
.IP \(bu 2
\fBNo defense against root or a compromised byn service.\fR Anyone who can
run code as root, as
.IR _byn ,
or as
.IR _byn\-exec
can read secrets. byn guards against ordinary same\-user processes; it is
not a hardware vault.
.IP \(bu 2
\fBAutonomous (password\-free) exec lowers the at\-rest floor for the vars it
covers.\fR Vars a trusted \fB.byn\fR allowlists for password\-free exec are
stored so the daemon can inject them WITHOUT the master password \(em their
at\-rest protection is then the machine fingerprint plus service\-user
isolation, not the password. This applies ONLY to those allowlisted vars
(an \fBenv = "*"\fR \fB.byn\fR opts in its whole scope); every other value
stays password\-protected at rest.
.IP \(bu 2
\fBNot a production secrets manager.\fR Physical and memory attacks
(cold\-boot, swap, memory dumps) are out of scope. See
.IR docs/security.md
for the full threat model.
.SH ROADMAP
Vault / project / env hierarchy, vault CRUD, project CRUD, env CRUD,
import / export, audit tail + verify, doctor,
.B .byn
discovery + TOFU trust, and a responsive bubbletea TUI are all
shipped. File\-content entries (Phase 5, FUSE materialization),
entry versioning CLI (\fBhistory\fR / \fBrevert\fR / \fBdiff\fR),
the Phase 2 local Web UI, Phase 3 shims, Phase 4 ACLs, and Phase 6
cloud sync remain. See
.IR PLAN.md
for the phased plan.
.SH SESSIONS
A session is a short\-lived credential that binds a vault unlock to the
terminal that performed it.  When \fBbyn unlock\fR succeeds and the
process has a controlling terminal, the daemon mints a 32\-byte random
token and returns it; the CLI writes it to
.IR <data-dir>/sessions/ .
The file name is a SHA\-256\-truncated hash of the terminal device number
and the vault name, so each terminal\-plus\-vault pair has its own file.
Subsequent commands from the same terminal send the token automatically;
the daemon validates it without another Argon2id round.
.PP
.B TTY binding.
The session is bound to the controlling terminal device number
(\fItty_nr\fR on Linux, \fITdev\fR on macOS) of the process that called
\fBbyn unlock\fR.  Commands from the same terminal window (and its child
processes) reuse the session; commands from another terminal are
treated as unauthenticated.  When there is no controlling terminal
(piped/scripted invocations) the vault is still unlocked but no session
file is written, and subsequent calls must provide the master password.
.PP
.B TTL and idle expiry.
Sessions expire after the absolute TTL
(\fI[security] session_ttl\fR, default 12\|h) and the idle window
(\fI[security] session_idle\fR, default 0 \(em inherit \fIidle_timeout\fR).
\fBbyn status\fR shows the active expiry time.
.PP
.B sessions/ directory.
The files under \fI<data-dir>/sessions/\fR are opaque tokens (mode 0600).
Their names are not meaningful outside the implementation.  Do not edit
or copy them; a copied token is bound to the terminal device of the
originating host, so it provides no cross\-machine access.
.PP
.B Ending a session.
\fBbyn lock \-\-session\fR revokes the token for the current terminal
and removes its file.  \fBbyn lock\fR (no flag) locks the vault and
removes all sessions for that vault.  \fBbyn lock \-\-all\fR locks
every vault and removes all session files.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR byn-init (1),
.BR byn-unlock (1),
.BR byn-lock (1),
.BR byn-put (1),
.BR byn-get (1),
.BR byn-list (1),
.BR byn-delete (1),
.BR byn-rename (1),
.BR byn-edit (1),
.BR byn-daemon (1),
.BR byn-status (1),
.BR byn-version (1),
.BR byn-help (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Sandeep Baynes.
.UR https://github.com/sandeepbaynes/byn
https://github.com/sandeepbaynes/byn
.UE
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2026 Sandeep Baynes. Licensed under the Business Source
License 1.1 \(em source\-available: free for internal and commercial use,
but not as a competing hosted secrets service. Each version converts to
Apache\-2.0 four years after its release. See the LICENSE file.
